'LANGUAGE' command (for the IRC-2 protocol)
-------------------------------------------

The LANGUAGE command is designed to break the language barrier and create an
environment where users can use their native language comfortably.

While the LANGUAGE command changes the text reply from the server to whatever
language selected (if it is available) this is only a tiny portion of what
the command was designed to do. Depending on your implementation, language
data could even go far enough to change the MOTD to target people who speak
a certain language. The command has much more of a purpose than this, though.

One key problem facing large international IRC networks these days is the
large variety of languages people speak on the network. Many people are often
curious as to what languages some people are speaking (especially if they
are stuck in US-ASCII due to previous character set limitations). The LANGUAGE
command allows a user to set the language they speak, or a list of languages
they are able to use over the network. This information is subsequently
available via the 'WHOIS' command anywhere on the network where the LANGUAGE
command is supported (hopefully network-wide :). Users would be able to
easily determine if a user can speak their native tongue!

Many IRC networks these days also have some form of 'services', usually a
channel service and a nickname service at least. These services often have help
facilities, and are usually only provided in English, or in a few other
languages via a specific interface. With the LANGUAGE command, this
information would be available to the services seamlessly (as user LANGUAGE
information is broadcast over the network) via a common interface.

On networks where 'u-lined' servers (servers who can act as 'arbiters' over
the network, like services) have control of other functions, implementors
may wish to allow the LANGUAGE command to be set on behalf of the user. This
would allow network services to 'remember' the language settings of a
particular user and restore them upon authentication. Likewise with any
connections which can be restored using cookies.

Note that there is NO character set information. All languages defined must
instead be written in the language dictated by the 005 numeric's CHARSET token.
This decision was made to standardise the transmission of languages. It is
strongly recommended to use UTF-8, as all languages can be easily
incorporated with no special character set translation tables and the
associated overhead necessary. UTF-8 is quickly becoming the default
transmission method for many internet systems.



Language codes:
---------------

  All language codes used with this command, and associated numerics, are
 in accordance with BCP-0047. This means that they may include codes from
 ISO-639-1, and/or any IANA assigned tags. There are two additions to this,
 however.

  Firstly, The language 'i-default' should always be assumed to exist (but 
 never be listed anywhere), and the server is to know 'i-default' as the
 specified default language. This can aid simplistic clients, or those who do
 not read ISUPPORT. This is an IANA assigned tag, and conforms to BCP-0047
 (for information, see http://www.iana.org/assignments/language-tags).
 
  Secondly, The special language 'none' is also ALWAYS supported, and also
 not normally listed, especially not in the WHOIS information. It is also a
 magic keyword which tells the server that no superfluous numeric text should
 be outputted. Really smart clients can use this to lower bandwidth
 consumption if they generate their own text for numeric responces or handle
 their own language code.
 


005 Numeric (RPL_ISUPPORT) addition:
------------------------------------
 
      LANGUAGE=[<max langs>],<entry>,<entry>...
 
  This shows that the LANGUAGE command is available for changing the
 language of the replies, and details the languages available. One language
 entry should be prefixed by a '*' character to show it is the 'default' to
 show the client it is the language that server defaults to. Without the '*'
 prefix, the first language on the list should be presumed the default.
 Language names are those identical to those defined by BCP-0047, which may
 include language codes from the ISO-639-1 standard, and/or language codes
 assigned by the IANA.
 
  The 'max langs' field shows how many langauges may be selected at once. The
 LANGUAGE command may support more than one language being specified, both to
 find the best language available but for WHOIS information to show which
 languages a person can speak. This has been done due to the large number of
 multilingual IRC users. It also provides alternative languages for bots and
 IRC servers to respond in. Initially the client should presume only one 
 language can be set at a time until told otherwise. This field may not exist,
 if there are a large amount of language codes -- see below.
 
  The two special language codes, 'i-default' and 'none', always exist, and
 therefore should not be listed here.
 
 eg. LANGUAGE=6,de,*en,fr,i-klingon
   Show that German, English, French and for the star-trek fans 'klingon' are
  available. English is the default, and therefore i-default is the same as
  'en'. Six languages may be selected at once for the WHOIS output.
  
  When many too many languages to fit within the line limits of the IRC-2
 protocol exist, LANGUAGE lines can be broken up, with the second line onwards
 simply missing the 'max langs' field. If the 'max langs' field is not present
 on any of the LANGUAGE lines, you may safely presume only one language can be
 set at a time.

 eg. LANGUAGE=6,en,*tr,de,fr
     LANGUAGE=,en-scouse,zh,zh-yue
     
  Six languages may be selected, from English, Turkish (the default), German,
 French, English with a scouse accent, Standard Chinese and Cantonese (also
 Chinese).



New Numerics
------------

687 - RPL_YOURLANGUAGEIS
      <code(s)> :<info>
      
       Reply to a LANGUAGE command denoting the language selected by the
      server. Along with a 'LANGUAGE' reply, this signifies to that client
      that the server will be using the given language to display future
      information, and confirms a change (if any). The code(s) are the same as
      defined in BCP-0047. This should also be sent after the 005 numeric is
      sent, preferrably before anything else (such as the MOTD).

       There are no restrictions on the 'info' field, other than those imposed
      by the IRC-2 protocol itself. It is recommended, however, that the
      information presented in this field can at least inform the client of
      the primary language they have specified.
      
       Note that the codes are returned in order of use. The first is always 
      the code referring to the most preferred language to receive messages
      in, going down to the least preferred language. The codes are returned
      in a comma delimetered list.
      
       The 'none' code may be returned here, however 'i-default', if specified
      by the client using the LANGUAGE command, should return as the real code
      specifying the default language.


688 - RPL_LANGUAGE
      <code> <revision> <maintainer> <flags> :<name> [ '-' <notes>]
      
       A list item for listing languages. The code variable is the
      language code as described in BCP-0047 assigned language code. The 
      revision is the version of the language file being used (just a number
      usually). The maintainer is an e-mail address of the person who 
      maintains that particular language file for contact with regards to 
      updates/corrections etc. Note that the maintainer field could also be 
      used for just a nickname if the author does not wish to be contactable 
      by e-mail, however that is probably a matter of network policy. 

       The name is given to show the name/variation of the language.
      The flags are a bunch of case sensitive characters in a row with
      special meaning. If no flags are set on a language, '*' will be 
      replaced instead (as with RPL_TIMEONSERVERIS). If there is no known
      maintainer information, it too will be replaced with a '*'.
      
       Optionally, additional information may be appended to the name, such as
      the language 'x-bork' may wish to include a comment about the language
      being intended to be humourous, and not a bad sveeeedish joke. Sorry :)
      
       Currently the following flags are possible:
        'd' - Default language and is selected upon connection (optional)
	'i' - This language may be incomplete (optional)
        's' - This language is a selected language (optional)
	'S' - This language is selected as the primary language (required)

      The list is terminated with numeric 666 (command = 'LANGUAGE')


690 - RPL_WHOISLANGUAGE
      <nickname> <language codes> [:speaks these languages]

       This is an optional extra to the WHOIS output, showing what language
      a user is using. The 'language codes' field is a comma-delimetered list
      of languages a person can speak (in order of preference, highest
      first, lowest last).
      
       The code 'none' should be suppressed (as it is not useful in this
      context), and the code 'i-default' should be translated into the real
      default language for the users' server.


981 - ERR_TOOMANYLANGUAGES
      <max languages> :Too many language codes specified
      
       Tell the client it cannot set any more languages. The maximum is given,
      which is indeed the same number given on the 005 numeric, to remind the
      client of the limit. The LANGUAGE command may or may not be executed
      after this numeric, depending on the implementation.

      
982 - ERR_NOLANGUAGE
      <language code> :is an unknown language to me
      
       Report to the client that the language given was unknown and will not
      be used, or shown in the WHOIS output. The LANGUAGE command may or may
      not be executed after this numeric, depending on the implementation.
      
       Some implementations may wish to accept languages (so long as the
      language code is validated somehow) regardless of whether or not the
      server can provide output in that language or not. The purpose of this
      would be to allow users to select languages for their WHOIS reply, even
      if the server cannot 'speak' that language.



The command itself
------------------

 The LANGUAGE command is designed to remain simple. There are two forms, one
with parameters and one without.

 When used without parameters, the LANGUAGE command simply returns a list of
languages the IRC daemon knows about, that is languages the IRC daemon can
return text in.

 Note in these examples, lines prefixed with '<' mean the line heads to the
server, and lines prefixed with '>' mean lines from the server. Please excuse
the poor spelling in these examples, since I'm trying to stick with US-ASCII
for this document.

 eg.
  < LANGUAGE
  > :server.foo.org 688 pickle en 20010710 someone@foo.org dS :English
  > :server.foo.org 688 pickle tr 20011201 someone@foo.org * :Turkce
  > :server.foo.org 688 pickle fr 20010807 somenick s :Francais
  > :server.foo.org 688 pickle de 20010528 foo!bahbaz@qux.net i :Deutsch
  > :server.foo.org 666 pickle LANGUAGE :End of LANGUAGE list
  
  (note that #666 = RPL_ENDOF_GENERIC)
  
 From this reply you can see (using the numerics listed above) that English
is the default language, and is currently selected. That's why English is used
for numeric #666. French is also selected.

 Note that the name of the language, the revision and the maintainer fields are
totally up to your own policies. It is strongly recommended that the name of
the language be written in its own language (since people who speak the
language will recognise the name better than if it was all in English, for
example). The only limitation is that the revision and the maintainer fields
must be one word.

 The LANGUAGE command is also used to set language(s), naturally. Here I
will change my selected language from English and French to Turkish and French:

  < LANGUAGE tr,fr
  > :server.foo.org 687 pickle fr,tr :Turkce
  
 The server replies with information set. I can also switch to the default
language very easily. Here, I want the default language alone:

  < LANGUAGE i-default
  > :server.foo.org 687 pickle en :English
  
 Remember that the default language is English - the "i-default" code simply
gets translated across neatly.

 I can also turn off replies from the server being in any language if my
client has its own mechanism for languages. This will only apply to numeric
replies, as other translations (services, for example) may remain using the
original setting, or the default setting. Here's how:

  < LANGUAGE none
  > :server.foo.org 867 pickle none * :

 For information which MUST be displayed (such as server NOTICE data), this
information will still be sent, but using the default language. However text
from numerics will always contain an empty text field unless it fits into the
category I just spoke about. By the way, an empty text field is allowed by
RFC1459.
 
 What if I wanted the server to send nothing from numerics, but I wanted
services output and/or important information which can only arrive in text
form to be in French instead of the default language? Try this:

  < LANGUAGE none,fr
  > :server.foo.org 867 pickle none,fr * :
  
 What about:

  < LANGUAGE foo,fr,de
  > :server.foo.org 982 pickle foo :
  > :server.foo.org 867 pickle fr,de * :Francais
  
 The server has rejected foo (it is not a valid language). You may implement
any policies you wish on rejection of languages. If you do intend to accept
unknown languages you don't have translations for, the follow should occur:

  < LANGUAGE ru,fr,de
  > :server.foo.org 867 pickle ru,fr,de * :French
  
 Notice how the server has not re-ordered the list, but it is now selecting
French for its text, as it is the first known available language it can use
for replies. All three languages would appear in WHOIS, in the same order
again:
  
  < WHOIS pickle
  > :server.foo.org 311 pickle pickle pickle simon.butcher.id.au * :Simon
  > :server.foo.org 319 pickle pickle :+#chaty
  > :server.foo.org 312 pickle pickle server.foo.org :Some witty comment here
  > :server.foo.org 317 pickle 1234 987654321 :temps de ralenti, temps de connexion
  > :server.foo.org 690 pickle ru,fr,de
  > :server.foo.org 318 pickle :Fin de liste de WHOIS
  
 (Yes, my French sucks! Sorry)

 If I wished to turn off message replies, but still want to announce
English, French and German:

  < LANGUAGE none,en,fr,de
  > :server.foo.org 687 pickle none,en,fr,de * :
  
 Numeric replies are now neatly turned off. If I WHOIS myself once more:

  < WHOIS pickle
  > :server.foo.org 311 pickle pickle pickle simonb.alien.net.au * :Simon
  > :server.foo.org 319 pickle pickle :+#chaty
  > :server.foo.org 312 pickle pickle server.foo.org :Some witty comment here
  > :server.foo.org 317 pickle 2345 987654321 :
  > :server.foo.org 690 pickle en,fr,de
  > :server.foo.org 318 pickle :
  
 The empty replies (apart from a few) show how text is selectively removed. 
Also note that there is no mention of "none" in the whois information, since
it's not really a language which is spoken. Well, unless you're a mute -
they don't count, since they can still IRC! :)
